Technical Expectations of the Habit Tracker Code


1. File Handling

The program uses a text file (habits.txt) for persistence.
Each line in the file stores a habit in the format:

Code
habit_name,status

Example:

Code
Exercise,done
Reading,Not done
If the file does not exist, the program starts with an empty habit list (FileNotFoundError is handled gracefully).
On exit (option 8), all habits are saved back to the file.



2. Data Structure

Habits are stored in a dictionary:

Key → habit name (string).

Value → status ("done" or "Not done").

This allows fast lookup when marking or deleting habits.



3. Menu Options & Expected Behavior

Option	Functionality	Technical Expectation
1. View Habits	Displays all habits with their status.	If no habits exist, prints "No habits found.". Otherwise shows each habit with "DONE" or "NOT DONE YET".
2. Add Habit	Adds a new habit with default status "Not done".	If the habit already exists, it will overwrite the status to "Not done".
3. Mark Habit as Done	Updates a habit’s status to "done".	If the habit doesn’t exist, prints "Habit not found.".
5. Delete Habit	Removes a habit from the dictionary.	If the habit doesn’t exist, prints "Habit not found.".
6. Reset All Habits	Sets all habits back to "Not done".	If no habits exist, prints "No habits to reset.".
7. Show Progress Percentage	Calculates percentage of completed habits.	If no habits exist, prints "No habits to track yet.".
   Otherwise shows: Progress: X/Y habits completed (Z%).
8. Exit	Saves habits to file and exits program.	Ensures persistence of changes.
4. Error Handling
FileNotFoundError → handled when loading habits (program starts fresh).

Invalid Menu Choice → prints "Invalid choice, try again.".

Habit Not Found → handled in marking and deleting.

 
5. User Interaction

Runs in a continuous loop until the user chooses option 8.

Input is taken via input() → requires manual typing.

Output is printed to the console → simple text interface.



6. Performance Expectations
Efficient for small to medium habit lists (dictionary lookups are O(1)).

File operations are lightweight (plain text read/write).

Not optimized for very large datasets (e.g., thousands of habits), but perfectly fine for personal use.



7. Limitations


No date-based tracking (habits don’t reset automatically each day).

No streak tracking (only “done” vs “not done”).

No duplicate prevention (adding the same habit overwrites status).

File format is plain text, not structured (like JSON/CSV with metadata).



In summary: This code is a simple, console-based habit tracker that stores habits in a text file,
lets users add, mark, delete, reset, and view progress. 
It’s reliable for personal daily use, but limited in advanced features like streaks, scheduling, or analytics.
